Kg/how to api (#2000)
chef/automate: components/automate-chef-io/README.md

1. [Install Hugo](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/installing/). If you're using homebrew:

    ```shell
    brew install hugo
    ```

1. [Install go-swagger](https://goswagger.io/install.html). The currently supported version is 0.20.1. If you're using homebrew:

    ```shell
    brew tap go-swagger/go-swagger && brew install go-swagger
    ```

    If everything is up to date you should see output like this when running `swagger version`:

    ```shell
    $ Swagger version
    version: v0.20.1

>     commit: 9004771f77bedabb792a48dc846ba7fc800398a0

Reviewer: 0.21.0 is the latest version so this change should probably be reverted. I'm not sure how important it is that the instructions be kept up to date with the latest latest version anymore though, so maybe we should just remove this?

>     commit: 9004771f77bedabb792a48dc846ba7fc800398a0

Author: ```suggestion
    commit: (SHA)
```

Hugo allows us to nest our data directory structure as much as necessary. You can add as many folders as necessary under `components/automate-chef-io/data/docs`.

```output
.
├── data
│   ├── docs
│   │   ├── cli
|   │   │   ├── command_one.yml
|   │   │   └── command_two.yml
```

## API Documentation

> To view the API documentation locally, 1. From the `components/automate-chef-io` directory, run the following command to start the development server.

Reviewer: It looks like this is halfway converted from a numbered list to prose?

Author: ```suggestion
To view the API documentation locally, navigate to the `components/automate-chef-io` directory, run the following command to start the development server:
```

```shell
$ make serve
```

To view the API docs in your browser, navigate to:

```shell
http://localhost:1313/docs/api
```

### Building API Docs

Chef Automate  generates API documentation from protoc files comments using

* [grpc-gateway protoc-gen-swagger](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/tree/master/protoc-gen-swagger) as the protoc compiler
* [OpenAPI 2.0 specification](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/2.0.md) as the API schema
* [ReDoc](https://github.com/Redocly/redoc) as the front-end display

To build the API documentation during development:

1. Make any edits to the .proto files necessary.
2. Recompile the .proto files as described in the [Automate development guide](https://github.com/chef/automate/blob/master/dev-docs/DEV_ENVIRONMENT.md)

> 3. Sync the .swagger files generated with those in the docs component: `make sync_swagger_files`

Reviewer: This is somewhat ambiguous, it should mention being in the `components/automate-chef-io` directory while running this command.

> 3. Sync the .swagger files generated with those in the docs component: `make sync_swagger_files`

Author: ```suggestion
3. From the top of the `components/automate-chef-io` directory, sync the .swagger files generated with those in the docs component by running `make sync_swagger_files`
```

4. Run the hugo server and view the documentation in your browser

Rebuilding the API docs is necessary when adding documentation content to Automate's .proto files. Changing the code in the .proto files does not require rebuilding, but new or updated services, messages, or fields require documentation.
Our goal is to provide timely and accurate documentation for Chef Automate users.

You can build the API docs by running the following all-in-one command from the top-level `automate` directory:

`hab studio run "source .studiorc && compile_all_protobuf_components" && pushd components/automate-chef-io/ && make sync_swagger_files generate_swagger && make serve || popd`

Review the API docs in your browser:

`http://localhost:1313/docs/api`

#### Notes on building the docs

* If you end up with merge conflicts while writing API docs, don't attempt to resolve them in any generated files. It's better to resolve the conflicts in any human edited file and then regenerate the docs.
* The all-in-one build command above can fail somewhere in the middle and leave things in an inconsistent state.

> It is safe to run multiple times in a row while fixing syntax errors in .proto files or similar, but since it changes directories it can sometimes be necessary to change back to the root automate directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is safe to run this command multiple times in a row while fixing syntax errors in .proto files or similar, but since it changes directories, it can sometimes be necessary to change back to the root automate directory.
```

### API File Index

* **API Proto Files**: automate/components/automate-gateway/api/
* **Example API Proto File**: automate/components/automate-gateway/api/compliance/reporting/
* **Meta Swagger**: automate/components/automate-chef-io/data/docs/api-static/01-meta-swagger.json
* **Reporting Export**: automate/components/automate-chef-io/data/docs/api-static/01-reporting-export.swagger.json
* **Description**: automate/components/automate-chef-io/data/docs/api-static/02-meta-description.yaml
* **Tags**: automate/components/automate-chef-io/data/docs/api-static/03-tags.swagger.json
* **Compiled Swagger**: automate/static/api-docs/all-apis.swagger.json

### Tags and Tag Groups

> * Endpoints need to appear in the rendered documentation human-readable groupings. We use group and endpoint tags to create an organized and meaningful presentation for the Chef Automate API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Endpoints need to appear in the rendered documentation as human-readable groupings. We use group and endpoint tags to create an organized and meaningful presentation for the Chef Automate API.
```

* An endpoint's default tag is the parent service where it was defined.
* Every service must have a unique tag name. For services without unique names, follow the explicit tagging process. Without unique service tag names, all endpoints for all of these services appear together in the rendered documentation.

#### Automatic tagging

Set up automatic tagging in the `components/automate-chef-io/data/docs/api-static/03-tags.swagger.json` file.

* Add the service's name to the `tags` list in a `tagGroup` or create a new `tagGroup` with the service's name in the `tags` list.
* Make the service name human-friendly by adding an entry to the `tags` in with a custom `x-displayName`.

#### Explicit tagging

* Each endpoint needs a tag specified in its definition, by adding a block like this to the endpoint definition in the proto file:

    ```go
    option (grpc.gateway.protoc_gen_swagger.options.openapiv2_operation) = {
      tags: "My Custom Tag"
    };
    ```

* All of the tags for an individual service should be the same, unless multiple groupings are desired in which case multiple independent tags can be used.

> * After this the process described for automatic tagging can be used, substituting the custom tag defined in place of the service's name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* After this, the process described for automatic tagging can be used, substituting the custom tag defined in place of the service's name.
```

## Notes

* Proto files can use tabs and spaces. We have a defacto convention for using tabs since our protos are primarily used with Go code.
* Endpoints will not show up in the UI unless one or more of their tags are assigned to a tag group, but they will still appear in the Swagger file accessible through the docs in the browser.

>   * To explicitly hide an endpoint and remove it from the Swagger file, assign it the tag of `hidden` and it will be filtered out in pre-processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To explicitly hide an endpoint and remove it from the Swagger file, assign it the tag of `hidden` and it will be filtered out in pre-processing.
```

Reviewer 2: If you meant to have this line as a sub-bullet, then ignore this suggestion! :)

> * multilinefields are not allowed in proto files. This the main reason we settled on using the comment style of endpoint documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* multiline fields are not allowed in proto files. This the main reason we settled on using the comment style of endpoint documentation.
```

      summary: "List reports"
      description: "This is the description.\nThe description can span multiple lines and can contain Github Flavored Markdown."
    };
  };
```

Resource documentation provides RPC-level description. It is sometimes also called "method description" because it documents the what you can do with a specific API HTTP Method.

Use block/leading comments for RPC-level/method documentation.

Compare the leading comments to the content of the API documentation for the `ReadNode(ID)` resource.

```go
	/*
	Fetch a node #(summary)

	Fetch a specific node by id. #(description)
	Does not support filtering, pagination or sorting.
	*/
	rpc ReadNode(Id) returns (Node) {
```

The rendered documentation:

![](./static/images/docs/api-resource-definition.png)

### Message Level Descriptions

Document fields and parameters directly above the relevant code line, using `//` inline comments

## Message Documentation

Given messages defined like this in the proto files:

```go
message Dog {
  // The dog's name.
  string name = 1;
  // Intentionally blank.
  Food favorite_food = 2;
  // Types of food the dog is normally fed.
  repeated Food typical_foods = 3;
}

> // Stats on the statuses of nodes matching the filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// A type of food eaten by a Dog
```

Not super important what this content is because it is a fake example, but the current text copy-pasted from elsewhere is kind of confusing.

> message ProfileCounts {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message Food {
```

Oops, I must have messed up editing my examples. :)

  // The food's name.
  string name = 1;
  // Serving size in ounces.
  int32 serving_size =3;
}
```

> * Use a period (`.`) at the end of the comment controls whether the field will get to set the `description` for message fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using a period (`.`) at the end of the comment controls whether the comment will be set as the `description` or `title` for message fields. Our convention is to include the period.
```

Author: Do I have this reversed?

Reviewer: Adding the period turns it from `title` to `description`, so I think this is backwards.

Reviewer: I think this sentence has some extra words in it?

> Omitting the period sets the comment will be set as the `description`

> * Swagger relies on inheritance to document nested references. A parent message referenced in a child message inherits its description from the parent, not where it is referenced by the child(see the example of `favorite_food` above). The Chef API style uses `// Intentionally blank.` in the child message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Swagger relies on inheritance to document nested references. A parent message referenced in a child message inherits its description from the parent, not where it is referenced by the child (see the example of `favorite_food` above). The Chef API style uses `// Intentionally blank.` in the child message.
```

This convention makes the purpose of the comment clear, makes undocumented message code visible, and makes bad blank message comment lines stand out in the UI.

## Non-Proto File Sources for API Documentation

> We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger our the front-end ReDoc tools have pronounced limitations, as well as in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.

Reviewer 2: Clarification is needed for this sentence. It's possible this should be two sentences, but I am not sure.

> We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger our the front-end ReDoc tools have pronounced limitations, as well as in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.

Author: ```suggestion
We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto files run up against the limitations of tool we use for the Swagger conversion and also in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.
```

> We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger our the front-end ReDoc tools have pronounced limitations, as well as in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger or the front-end ReDoc tools have pronounced limitations, as well as in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.
```

> We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger our the front-end ReDoc tools have pronounced limitations, as well as in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.

Author: ```suggestion
We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger is limited by our tools and also in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.
```

> We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto files run up against the limitations of tool we use for the Swagger conversion and also in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use non-proto file sources to document API content in cases where proto file conversion to Swagger is limited by our tools and also in cases where expressing the content in proto files is cumbersome.
```
